---
layout: single
title:  State Of The Art goals
date:   2019-04-06 21:02:10 -0700
categories: goals about
---
Hi everyone! Today I want to tell about the future.

I'm just a regular engineer and relatively long time working for a companies which need my skills to
automate their processes. What I see for all of the years - that a huge number of people making some
useless things (in general of course). They just wasting their time trying to appease the bosses,
compromise with conscience - no one wants to lose their place and as result: again and again they
are build not good solutions with huge tech debt. Such company projects just can't satisfy worker
curiosity, don't allow self-realization and ultimately kill any craving for the creation of new and
interesting things.

But anyway the day will come and almost everyone will realize, that their time is going away. Every
year they asking themselves "What I've reach/learned/done this year?" and if answer is just "Fed my
family by sitting on the workplace doing meaningless things", than such guys will never feel good.
And this guys are not just a regular mules - they are high-level professionals, most important asset
of any company. They have their dreams, but need to spend their life in this way - because what they
can do with it?

## The future

When someone asking me how the society will look in the future - I tell about *unity of free
creators*. They living and the main purpose of their existance is self-realization. They have enough
money to live, but they can't picture themself without creating something new - without reaching the
new horizons and taking new peaks. They are artists, musicians, architects, developers, programmers.
They are creators.

Why they are doing this? Because in the future AI & robots doing boring things and for human there
is the only one job - to generate ideas, think about realization, telling AI what need to be done
and pointing to the next goal.

Of course, it's just an imaginary future, but think about it - many creators already trying to fight
the system, just live and build new things. But reality tell them - you need to feed yourself and
your family, means you need to spend your precious time to do some proprietary things that will
never been seeing by the rest of the world. So they can't get satisfaction from their work even if
they building something interesting - if noone will see that - than what is the point? Just to get
some money and spend rest of their time for the pet-projects.

Many of programmers are going to opensource to help the others with their ideas or starting their
project as opensource - because right now it's the best way to actually do something. Usually they
have enough money, but don't have enough time to plunge into the idea.

And who is this guys? It's specialists, professionals who know what they are doing. They want know
more, jump higher, run faster than anyone else. But they are stuck in 5d/8h daily job where they
usually doing something will never be used by anyone.

## Why and How?

So this project is gonna change the world of IT development.

Companies will never hire someone to just sit and get salary. Companies will have open tickets to
build something and anyone could join and get the bounty if their solution is good enough. Most of
the businesses right now using opensource software and they need to understand that proprietary
software is already resigned. So why they still spending money to create such new useless things?

It will be much better to create ticket in some opensource application and set some bounty for the
one, who will prepare a good solution and it will be merged to the project (or will just be good
enough to fit the customer's requirements).

Of course it's just a raw thoughts and some details probably will be different, but overall it will
somehow solve the issue with a developers free time: someone found interesting ticket and started
to do it. When he did it - community & customer reviewing it and deciding what changes need to be
applied. When the code is merged with the codebase - executor is getting reward.

Creator is not belongs to a company or managers anymore - he is free to do whatever he wants. So
this could turn the page of our history, but of course need to be tested. So *State Of The Art* is
here to try this approach, correct it and show to the rest of the world.

If it will work good - we will be one step closer to a different world where creators are free.

If it will not - so, we will try something else. Optimization and automation will find the best way
for us and for our future.
